SPAIN
 
 
Spain is a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional
monarch. During the past 6 years a modified form of
federalism has been instituted, with 17 regional governments
sharing administrative and political power with the national
and municipal governments. At all levels of government,
elections must be held at least every 4 years. Voter
participation is high, and the freedoms of speech, press,
religion, assembly, movement, and participation in the
political process are extended to all groups and minorities.
 
The Spanish economy is mixed, with primary reliance on private
initiative and market mechanisms. Social welfare and equity
have received a high priority since the return of democracy to
Spain in 1976-77, but world economic conditions and severe
structural problems in the Spanish economy have restricted
available resources. Unemployment (19-20 percent) is a major
problem.
 
The overall level of respect for human rights in Spain is
high. Real or alleged violations over the past year have
continued to focus mainly on political terrorism and the
Government's efforts to control and eliminate it. The
Government has denied charges that it supports antiterrorist
violence. Many persons arrested in connection with terrorism
have alleged mistreatment, sometimes including torture. In
some cases, law enforcement personnel have been found guilty
and punished.
 
RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 
Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
Freedom from:
 
a. Political Killing
 
In the first 9 months of 1985, 49 persons died in terrorist
actions in Spain, compared to 27 for the same period in 1984.
The largest single death toll was the bombing of a restaurant
near Madrid in April 1985, in which 18 persons lost their
lives. Responsibility has not been determined. Foreign
groups, primarily from the Middle East, have carried out some
actions in Spain, but terrorism in Spain in 1985 remained
primarily an indigenous phenomenon. The largest number of
incidents and deaths were claimed by or attributed to the
Basque separatist group ETA (Basque Fatherland and Freedom
Movement). Frequently the victims are police and military
personnel .
 
From January to August 1985, several alleged ETA activists
were killed by GAL (Antiterrorist Liberation Group). These
killings by GAL occurred in France. There have been charges,
denied by the Government, that GAL has links to Spanish
security forces.
 
b. Disappearance
 
There were no reports that government security forces have
engaged in secret arrests or kidnappings. There was one
recorded ETA kidnapping for ransom. Security forces carried
out a successful raid to free the person.
 
c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
 
Government security forces have been accused of torturing and
beating some arrestees, primarily in terrorism-related cases.
According to the Ministry of Interior, in the first 9 months
of 1985 there were approximately 393 persons arrested under
the antiterrorist law, compared to approximately 849 arrested
under this law in 1984. Many of these persons filed formal
complaints of police brutality. From 1983 to August 1985 some
30 members of the various security forces have been punished
for mistreatment of detainees.
 
In December the drowned body of alleged ETA activist Mikel
Zabalza was found in a river near where security forces said
he had escaped 2 weeks earlier. Family and friends claimed
Zabalza had been tortured and thrown into the river. The
autopsy, witnessed by a non-Spanish observer, revealed no
indications of torture. Zabalza' s case became a rallying
point for critics of the antiterrorist law, particularly its
provision for holding persons incommunicado for up to 10 days
(see Section 1 .d. ) .
 
According to all available sources, prison living conditions
have continued to improve, and there have been few reports of
prisoner mistreatment in 1985. The prison system has tecently
begun to allow conjugal visits on a limited basis. The
International Red Cross has permission to visit any prison
whenever it wants in order to review prison conditions.
 
d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 
Arbitrary arrests and detention are prohibited by the
Constitution. This prohibition is respected in practice.
Civil libertarians, however, criticize the special
antiterrorist legislation which permits a person to be
detained incommunicado for up to 10 days. The detainee has to
be brought to the court's attention during the first 72 hours
of detention, but the court has discretion to extend the
period prior to arraignment for another 7 days. Critics of
the antiterrorist law say that the judge often approves the
extension of the period of detention without seeing the
detainee, because the supervising court is in Madrid and
detainees under this law are most often arrested in the Basque
provinces.
 
A person detained under the antiterrorist law has to be
informed of his rights and the reason for arrest. The
detainee may not choose his own lawyer; instead, one is
provided to him from the private (and independent) Association
of Lawyers. There is no provision for an independent medical
examination. The Government contends that allowing the
detainee to choose his own attorney or doctor might enable him
to communicate with accomplices outside. The appointed
attorney formally advises the detainee of his rights,
including the right to remain silent, and is present during
his interrogation. However, he may not consult with the
detainee until the interrogation is completed.
 
There is no forced labor in Spain.
 
e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 
The Constitution guarantees the right to a fair public trial,
and this right is observed in practice. The law provides for
an expeditious judicial hearing following arrest. Defendants
may always appeal to the next highest court, and up to the
Council of Europe in cases concerning human rights.
 
f . Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
Correspondence
 
Privacy of home and correspondence is protected by the
Constitution. Under the Criminal Code, government authorities
must obtain court approval before searching private property,
wiretapping, or interfering with private correspondence. The
current antiterrorist law, however, permits the Minister of
Interior and the Director of Security to initiate postal,
telephonic, and telegraphic observation "in cases of
emergency," but they must inform the court of relevant
jurisdiction immediately after the action taken.
 
Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 
a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 
The Government scrupulously observes the guarantee of free
speech and press provided in the Constitution. Opposition
viewpoints are freely expressed in speech and through the
media.
 
b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 
As provided in the Constitution, all groups have the right of
free assembly and association for political or other purposes.
 
Under the Constitution, trade unions are free to organize,
bargain collectively, and strike. About 20 percent of the
Spanish work force is unionized. Trade unions are not
subjected to official harassment. They freely maintain ties
with recognized international organizations.
 
c. Freedom of Religion
 
There is no state religion in Spain. Catholicism is the
predominant religion, but other religions are represented and
function with full freedom. Adherence to a particular faith
neither enhances nor diminishes a person's secular status.
 
A 1984 law gives legal status to conscientious objectors. The
constitutionality of the law's requirement that conscientious
objectors perform social service for 6 months longer than the
period of service of their military counterparts is being
considered by the Constitutional Court.
 
d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 
Spanish citizens have the freedom to travel in and outside the
country. The Government restricts neither emigration nor
repatriation. A law providing for political asylum, approved
in March 1984, has been generally described as progressive and
fair. However, the law controlling the residence of aliens,
which affects some 750,000 persons, is criticized for allowing
the Government too much discretion in expelling aliens and
 
restricting their right of association. A constitutional
challenge has been brought by the Office of the Public
Defender (government ombudsman) .
 
Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
to Change Their Government
 
Spain is a multiparty democracy with open elections in which
all citizens over the age of 18 have the right to participate.
Opposition groups exist openly and take active part in the
political process. Of more than 50 national and regional
political organizations which took part in the 1982 national
elections, the Socialist Workers Party won an absolute
majority of parliamentary seats.
 
Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 
Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
of Human Rights
 
The Government maintains good relations with international
hiaman rights groups, such as Amnesty International and the
International Red Cross, as well as with national groups, such
as the Spanish Human Rights Association. The Foreign
Ministry, through an Office of Human Rights Affairs and
current membership in the United Nations Human Rights
Commission, takes an active interest in human rights issues
internationally.
 
Amnesty International, in its 1985 Report (covering the year
1984), was concerned about the torture and ill-treatment of
"detainees and the opportunity for abuses when detainees were
held incommunicado under the antiterrorist law. Freedom House
rated Spain "free."
 
ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 
A country with a population of 38,829,000 in 1985 and a growth
rate of 0.6 percent, Spain has a mixed-market economy. Per
capita gross national product in 1983 was $4,780. Spain's
economy, affected in the last few years by the general slump
in the world economy, continues to recover slowly.
 
Under the present Government, inflation has considerably
decreased, exports have surged, and a painful but necessary
program of industrial restructuring and modernization has
moved forward. A low rate of domestic investment and high
unemployment (officially calculated at around 20 percent)
remain major problem areas, although these are mitigated
somewhat by the existence of a substantial "underground"
economy .
 
The food, shelter, health, and educational needs of the people
are generally met. Life expectancy at birth in 1985 was 74.6
years, the infant mortality rate was 9.0 per 1,000 live
births, and the adult literacy level was 92.6 percent. Over
92 per cent of primary-school-age children were in fact in
school in 1981.
 
Workers in general have substantial well-defined rights. A
40-hour week was established by law in 1983. Spanish workers
also enjoy 12 paid holidays a year and a month's paid
vacation. A minimum wage tied to the cost of living is
provided by law. Children under 16 years of age may not be
employed. Working and health conditions are generally good.
 
Workers in the underground economy, estimated to be as high as
25 percent in some areas, frequently do not have the same
protections and benefits as those in the open economy.
 
Women's ec[uality in the workplace is guaranteed by law. The
Constitution confirms the equality of the sexes. Nonetheless,
women face practical obstacles in the achievement of equal
opportunity because employers are under no legal obligation to
announce jobs for open competition. In recent years, women
have made significant inroads into some traditionally
male-dominated professions, such as law and medicine.
 
The role of women in Spanish society is also changing in other
ways. A 1985 law permits women to have abortions when their
physical and mental health would be threatened by giving
birth. Because of the work of the Women's Institute, the
problem of battered women is now recognized. In less than 2
years it has established 10 centers for battered women in
cities throughout Spain. The Civil Guard, the state's
security force in the countryside, has voluntarily extended
its support to the Women's Institute in the implementation of
its educational program concerning battered women.
 
Gypsies are a minority group representing 3 percent of the
Spanish population. They sometimes suffer discrimination in
housing, schools, and jobs. Legal mechanisms exist by which
they can seek redress, for example, from discrimination by an
employer. As a practical matter, however, Gypsies do not
normally seek such redress. Pending in Parliament is a
proposed law which would create an agency to aid the Gypsy
community.