I personally do not like what the Beer Store (aka Brewers Retail) is. What that is exactly is a multinational conglomerate that enjoys exclusivity when it comes to selling beer in certain quantities namely 12 and 24 packs.

Why the LCBO/government of Ontario allows this completely non-Canadian entity to operate as a monopoly/oligopoly is mind boggling and in all likelihood as corrupt as it gets.

This particular location at Burnhamthorpe and Saturn really isn't that different from any other Beer Store I've ever been to. They are a buy your product and GTFO kind of setup. You ask for what you want it comes out thrown down a roller chute coming out from behind a wall. Personal touch? LOL, right... perhaps they stereotype what they think is the typical male and think this is how one likes to shop.

I only go to The Beer Store for one thing and that's to return bottles and cans for money so I can walk across the parking lot and buy more beer or wine at the LCBO which is the lesser of the two evils when purchasing alcohol in the grand province of Ontario.

The LCBO store is like fine dining and The Beer Store is like a food truck. Either way the advantage to buying from the LCBO besides actually getting to speak to people is the fact that it's a store. You can browse the products and see them, touch them and not just read off a menu on the wall. Beer is mostly sold in quantities of six but at the LCBO you can if you wanted to just buy one beer from a 6 pack. Yes, you can break that pack. You buy singles of tallboys and mix and match too.

There's more flexibility as opposed to The Beer Store at the LCBO and you are in fact purchasing product directly from the government when you look at it that way. Either way we are going to pay ridiculous amounts of money for beer in Ontario. If you're going to get raked over coals, take the lesser of 2 evils and buy from the government as opposed to lining the pockets of the Molson-Coors, Labatt (Anheuser-Busch InBev) and Sleeman (Sapporo) conglomerate.