 SOUTH AFRICA
 South Africa is a multiracial society whose laws codify the
 doctrine of apartheid, which prescribes the basic rights and
 obligations of people according to their racial or ethnic
 origin. The country's black majority (72 percent of the
 population) suffers from pervasive, legally sanctioned
 discrimination based on race in political, economic, and
 social aspects of life. The country's other nonwhite racial
 groups (principally "coloreds" and Asians) also suffer from
 extensive racial discrimination, although to a lesser degree
 than South Africa's black population. The South African
 Government is now publicly committed to the concept of common
 citizenship in a united South Africa and to negotiation with
 blacks to shape a new constitutional structure, including
 political participation by all groups. Currently, however,
 the political rights of the black majority are confined to
 participation in tightly controlled urban councils in the
 country's black residential areas ("townships") and through
 the 10 government-designed and sponsored tribal areas known as
 "homelands."
 In 1985, the South African Government continued an incremental
 reform process, with the new 1984 Constitution featuring a
 strong chief executive, the State President, and a Parliament
 with three chambers (a white House of Assembly, a colored
 House of Representatives, and an Indian House of Delegates)
 based on a racial ratio of 4.2.1/white, colored, Asian.
 Blacks do not have the right to vote in national elections and
 have no representation in Parliament. As a practical matter,
 the parliamentary system allows any chamber to block
 legislation, but ensures white domination by giving ultimate
 decisionmaking power to the white controlled President's
 Council. The new Constitution remains a highly controversial
 instrument. Parliamentary elections in 1984 marked the
 beginning of widespread civil unrest, detentions, and police
 actions that continued in 1985.
 In 1985, Parliament passed a series of changes in the
 apartheid system, including the repeal of long-standing
 legislation banning marriage and sexual relationships between
 whites and nonwhites and of a statute that banned multiracial
 political alliances. In 1985, the Government also announced
 that it planned to introduce a freehold system of land
 ownership for blacks, and that it would review "influx
 control" legislation, which was designed to keep most blacks
 in their homelands and make them, by law, temporary sojourners
 in "white" South Africa. In addition, the Government made
 further changes in the area of so-called "petty apartheid",
 including the limited desegregation of trains and some other
 public facilities under a "local option" system.
 Notwithstanding these changes, race still remains the basis
 for the organization of South African society. Discriminatory
 laws and practices are woven throughout the fabric of South
 African life, notably in the Constitution itself.
 The South African economy has slowed perceptibly in the past 4
 years, due in part to low world prices for its exports, and a
 serious economic downturn in 1984-85 was a major contributing
 factor to political unrest during 1985. The South African
 Government has estimated that an annual real growth rate of 5
 to 6 percent is necessary for the economy to absorb the
 approximately 250,000 black entrants to the labor market each
 year. An even higher rate of growth would be necessary to
 
 
 292
 SOUTH AFRICA
 reduce present black unemployment, privately estimated at 25
 percent or more. There seems to be little possibility that
 South Africa will experience such growth in the foreseeable
 future, especially in the absence of capital inflows from
 abroad.
 Against the backdrop of slow, incremental change and a deep
 economic recession, political discontent and ferment increased
 dramatically in the nation's black and colored townships
 during 1984-85. According to the South African Institute of
 Race Relations, 843 people died because of political unrest,
 and almost 11,000 persons were detained during the course of
 the year. By the end of 1985, approximately 1,000 persons
 remained in detention under all security legislation,
 including the homelands. While the majority of deaths
 occurred as the result of police action, many others were
 caused by politically motivated "black-on-black" violence.
 Black trade union leaders suffered frequent harassment,
 persecution, and detention. In 1985, one black union leader
 died of head injuries after a short detention period, under
 circumstances that clearly suggested physical abuse by the
 police. At least three other deaths of detainees occurred
 under similar circumstances in 1985. Several documented
 allegations of torture by police were also made in 1985, and
 several injunctions against physical abuse were granted by the
 courts.
 On July 21, 1985, the State President proclaimed a state of
 emergency in 36 of South Africa's 265 magisterial districts,
 including key black urban areas. Only the province of Natal
 is untouched by the emergency regulations. These give
 extraordinary arrest, detention, and other powers to police
 and military, who are also fully indemnified against
 prosecution for all acts committed "in good faith." Under
 these emergency regulations, any member of the South African
 Police, the military (South African Defense Force-SADF) or
 South African Railways Police, on his own authority, may
 arrest and detain any person whom he believes to be a threat
 to the public safety. The SADF was given new police powers in
 December to assist police in quelling unrest in areas not
 covered by the state of emergency. The press is outspoken,
 but its freedom to report is circumscribed by security
 legislation, official censorship, and self-censorship. In
 November, the Government banned TV, photography, sound
 recording, and sketching of events without police permission
 in areas covered by the state of emergency.
 The banned African National Congress (ANC), most of whose
 leadership is in exile or detention, continued to demonstrate
 its opposition to the South African Government during 1985.
 It hit a variety of targets and urged black South Africans to
 overthrow the apartheid system by concerted acts of violence
 against police and black township government officials, with
 the stated purpose of making South Africa's townships
 ungovernable. The SADF launched a cross-border attack into
 Botswana in June, in what the Government claimed was an effort
 to destroy an ANC training base. Fourteen people were killed
 in this attack. While the South African Government has denied
 responsibility, the Lesotho Government claims that South
 African commandos killed nine South African political refugees
 in Maseru on December 20. In February 1985, the State
 President offered to release jailed ANC leader Nelson Mandela,
 now serving a life sentence for sabotage, conditioned on
 Mandela's renunciation of violence as a means of political
 
 
 293
 SOUTH AFRICA
 change. Mandela refused the conditional offer, citing the
 South African Government.'s own failure to renounce violence in
 the enforcement of the apartheid system.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Widespread unrest in South Africa'sblack townships claimed an
 estimated 843 lives (nearly all of whom were black) in 1985,
 according to figures compiled by the South African Institute
 of Race Relations (SAIRR). .Security forces were responsible
 for the majority.of these deaths. Police often quelled
 demonstrations with excessive force, utilizing teargas,
 birdshot, whips, and rubber bullets. Police have also used
 live ammunition to disperse demonstrators. According to press
 accounts, some 322 deaths attributable to political unrest
 occurred between July 21 (the effective date of the
 declaration of a state of emergency in 36 of 265 magisterial
 districts) and the end of October. While most of these deaths
 were theresult of police action, some of the killings took
 .the form of black political faction-fighting; others were
 attacks by blacks against township government officials and
 other suspected "collaborators." In October, the Government
 said that between September 1984 and August 1985,_210 blacks
 had been killed and 884 hurt by "radical elements" within the
 black community. Among those killed weref14 black policemen.
 In 1985, because of restrictions on other forms of gatherings,
 funerals became a principal means for blacks to express
 discontent with the political system, and these gatherings led
 to confrontations with police. On March 21, 1985, police
 opened fire on a group of black mourners at a funeral in
 Langa, near Uitenhage, killing at least 19 and injuring 36.
 Amid allegations that the police grossly overreacted to an
 alleged planned attack by the demonstrators, the Government
 appointed a special commission to investigate the incident.
 The commission concluded, inter alia, that, while no one
 person could be held responsible, it was a matter of grave
 concern that riot control equipment such as rubber bullets and
 birdshot was not available at the scene at the time of the
 Langa incident. The commission also concluded that a
 magistrate's banning order of the funeral set the scene for a
 confrontation between police and mourners. In August, all
 funerals were restricted by the Minister of Law and Order
 under the state of emergency regulations.
 Other examples of violence included: On November 21, in the
 township of Mamelodi, near Pretoria, police fired live
 ammunition to disperse a group of women who had marched on the
 town hall that day to present grievances to the township
 government. The incident left at least 19 people dead, some
 as a result of the stampede that followed police action in
 dispersing the demonstration. Some eyewitnesses alleged that
 police continued to shoot people without warning and without
 provocation while the crowd fled. In June, four United
 Democratic Front (UDF) leaders, including Cradock community
 leader Matthew Goniwe, disappeared shortly after a meeting in
 Port Elizabeth. Their charred bodies were found several days
 later. There was widespread suspicion that government forces
 or rival blacks under official sanction may have been
 
 
 294
 SOUTH AFRICA
 responsible for these deaths, but the Government denied any
 involvement. In October, white police in a black township
 near Pretoria allegedly beat to death a 13-year-old black boy,
 Moses Mope. Local residents claimed that the attack was
 unprovoked. As a result of this incident, the police
 suspended a white police constable, and in November the
 Government began prosecution of the officer for culpable
 homicide. In February, violence broke out in Cape Town's
 squatter area of "Crossroads" when people feared the police
 would attempt to remove residents to Khayelitsha, a nearby
 resettlement area. Eighteen people died in the ensuing
 violence between police and residents and in fighting between
 different factions within the community. Many more suffered
 injuries.
 There were at least four known cases of deaths of detainees in
 1985 that occurred under circumstances suggesting police
 abuse. Chemical Industrial Workers' Union official Andries
 Raditsela was arrested in Johannesburg May 4 and died 2 days
 later of head injuries, shortly after he was released from
 police custody. Also in May, Sipho Mutsi, a member of the
 Congress of South African Students (COSAS), died of head
 injuries while in police custody in the Orange Free State. In
 September, a UDF organizer, Mbuyiselo Mbutya, died under
 similar circumstances after 1 day in detention in the Cape
 Province. In another incident, Bheki Mvolane was admitted to
 a hospital in a coma some 10 days after his arrest on charges
 of public violence. He died in April without regaining
 consciousness. As of the end of October, the Government had
 not undertaken prosecutions in any of these cases, although it
 did have each one under investigation. In October, the
 Government charged two white policemen with homicide arising
 out of the death of Mphiwa Ngwenya in police custody in
 November 1984.
 The African National Congress (ANC), a revolutionary
 organization that openly advocates the violent overthrow of
 the apartheid system, claimed responsibility for a number of
 acts of sabotage in 1985. The ANC primarily targeted
 installations and offices involved with the administration of
 apartheid, although some civilian targets were also hit.
 Durban and Johannesburg suffered the largest number of
 incidents. At the beginning of 1985, the ANC's stated policy
 was to avoid civilian deaths and to concentrate only on
 noncivilian targets. In the course of the year, the ANC
 modified this stated policy, blurring the distinction between
 civilian and military targets and calling for an extension of
 violence to white areas. A December 23 bomb explosion at a
 shopping center near Durban claimed the lives of five people
 and injured many others. While the Government alleged that
 the ANC was responsible for the blast, ANC officials in Lusaka
 denied this but acknowledged that it may have been the work of
 renegade elements within the organization. A land mine
 explosion killed six civilians December 15 in the Northern
 Transvaal. The ANC claimed responsibility for the incident.
 Much black township violence--in particular, attacks on the
 homes and persons of black policemen and township government
 officials--was probably inspired, at least in part, by the
 ANC, whose current public strategy is to render the townships
 ungovernable and to attack so-called "collaborators" in the
 black community. In June, the houses of two colored members
 of Parliament were the targets of hand grenade attacks
 attributable to the ANC. The South African security police
 and the University of Pretoria's Institute of Strategic
 
 
 SOUTH AFRICA
 Studies said that from January to October 1985, there were 48
 instances of assassination and attempted assassination of
 police, state witnesses, and other individuals that could be
 attributed to the ANC.
 b. Disappearance
 South African law does not require notification of a
 detainee's family, lawyer, or any other person in the event of
 a detention or arrest. The Second Police Amendment Act of
 1980 prohibits the unauthorized publication of the name of any
 person detained for "the prevention of or combatting of
 terroristic activities." Many people have disappeared,
 reportedly into police custody, for long periods. Some,
 missing for very long periods of time, are suspected by
 friends and associates to have been killed by security
 forces. On May 8, three leaders of the Port Elizabeth Black
 Civic Organization disappeared after they left their homes for
 the Port Elizabeth airport. On July 15, families of the
 missing men filed an action in the Supreme Court in Port
 Elizabeth, alleging that the men had been seen alive in police
 custody and that their charred bodies were subsequently seen
 in the murder and robbery squad office of the Port Elizabeth
 police station. The missing men were still not definitively
 accounted for by the end of the year.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Security legislation, in particular the Internal Security Act,
 allows police considerable latitude and generally unsupervised
 discretion in the arrest and detention of suspects, and in the
 interrogation of detainees. Lengthy periods of detention,
 during which authorities are not obliged by law to present
 formal charges, are a frequent occurrence and offer
 considerable potential for police abuse of detainees. Some
 persons detained under the state of emergency have presented
 affidavits to the effect that they were tortured while in
 police detention. The types of torture alleged include:
 beatings, eardrum perforations, whippings, forced ingestion of
 foreign substances including gasoline and human hair, and the
 application of electrical shocks to genitals. In September,
 the South African Supreme Court (South Eastern Cape local
 division), acting on the affidavit of a prison physician,
 found reason to enjoin police in the Port Elizabeth area from
 assaulting state of emergency detainees. Denis Neer, General
 Secretary of the Motor Assembly and Component Workers Union of
 South Africa (MACWUSA), an affiliate of the UDF, won a
 restraining order against police after he had been assaulted
 while detained under the state of emergency regulations.
 Provisions indemnifying law enforcement officials from both
 criminal and civil liability for acts undertaken in enforcing
 the state of emergency are cited by some human rights
 activists and other observers as giving police the impression
 that they have license to engage in abusive conduct.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Internal Security Act authorizes detention without charge
 or trial for varying--and in some cases potentially
 unlimited--periods. The Minister of Law and Order must
 personally issue orders under Section 28 of the Act, which he
 has characterized as preventive detention. Senior police
 
 
 296
 SOUTH AFRICA
 officials may detain people for interrogation under Section 29
 of the Act when offenses such as terrorism, sabotage, or
 inciting a revolutionary situation are suspected. Access to
 detainees is severely restricted, and no court may challenge
 arrests under the provisions of this law. There have been
 reports of some improvement in access since the Minister of
 Justice invited parliamentarians to visit detainees arrested
 under the state of emergency. According to the Detainees
 Parents' Support Committee, 1,633 people were detained under
 the security legislation from January to October of 1985, 392
 of whom were still in custody as of the end of October (these
 detention figures do not include those being held under the
 state of emergency, discussed below). Section 30 of the
 Internal Security Act provides that the right of bail may be
 foreclosed from judicial determination by unilateral action on
 the part of the prosecuting attorney general in certain
 security cases-. A decision by the Natal Provincial Attorney
 General to refuse bail under Section 30 to 16 political and
 labor union activists in a treason case in Pietermaritzburg
 was nullified on technical grounds by the Natal Supreme Court,
 which then ordered the defendants to be freed on bail. The
 Natal Attorney General did not follow up, thereby permitting
 the court decision to stand. A similar challenge to a Section
 30 certification by the Transvaal Provincial Attorney General
 succeeded in the Transvaal Supreme Court on behalf of 22
 defendants in another treason case. The Transvaal court,
 however, refused the bail application.
 On August 27, UDF patron and World Alliance of Reformed
 Churches President Allan Boesak, an outspoken critic of the
 Government, was detained under Section 29 of the Internal
 Security Act. The arrest took place on the eve of a march
 that Boesak was planning to lead on Pollsmoor Prison to demand
 the release of Nelson Mandela. A magistrate had previously
 banned the march. Boesak was held incommunicado until his
 release on bail September.20. The court subsequently eased
 the conditions of his bail, which amounted, in substance, to a
 "banning" order against Boesak.
 On July 20, 1985, citing increasing violence and disorder in
 black townships, State President P.W. Botha invoked the Public
 Safety Act of 1953 and declared an official state of emergency
 in 36 of South Africa's 265 magisterial districts effective
 July 21. (The Government's only other such use of the Public
 Safety Act was in 1960, following rioting in Sharpville.)
 While the state of emergency applied to less than 15 percent
 of the country's magisterial districts, it covered nearly all
 of South Africa's urban black population, including numerous
 townships in the eastern part of Cape Province and Soweto, the
 nation's largest black township on the outskirts of
 Johannesburg. Starting in late October, the State President
 lifted the state of emergency in some districts, but extended
 it in others.
 A person detained under emergency regulations may be held
 incommunicado and without charge for up to 14 days, following
 which the detention may be reordered for an extended period or
 for the duration of the state of emergency. By the end of
 1985, more than 7,000 detentions had taken place under state,
 of emergency regulations. Almost all state of emergency
 detainees were black. Police figures indicated that 452 of
 these persons were still being held in detention at the end of
 the year. Many of those released ultimately were not charged
 with any offense, a circumstance suggesting that the police
 
 
 297
 SOUTH AFRICA
 had engaged in an arbitrary use of detention powers. The
 South African Police and the South African Defense Forces were
 the major security personnel responsible for enforcing the
 state of emergency. Some analysts have claimed an apparent
 attempt by the Government to use state of emergency
 regulations to round up and detain opposition UDF figures.
 Under both state of emergency and other security legislation,
 detentions of children under the age of 16 occurred during
 1985. In August, at one Soweto school, police detained some
 800 school children, most of whom were under the age of 14.
 Most of these detainees were released to the custody of their
 parents within 48 hours. Human rights groups have frequently
 criticized the Government for longer-term detention of
 children under the age of 16.
 Available evidence suggests that at least 36 trade unionists
 were detained without charges or trial (primarily under
 'Section 29 of the Internal Security Act) during 1985.
 The Internal Security Act of 1982 authorizes the Minister of
 Law and Order to issue "banning" orders. Under such orders,
 any person judged by the Minister to be endangering law and
 order, threatening state security, or promoting the aims of
 Communism or an unlawful organization can be (1) made to
 resign as an officer or member of any organization; (2)
 restricted to or excluded from certain areas; (3) prohibited
 from meeting with more than one person at a time; (4) ordered
 to report regularly to a police station; and (5) prohibited
 from being quoted or published. No court can challenge the
 Minister's power to issue banning orders, although the
 Internal Security Act does provide for administrative review
 of such orders. According to the South African Institute of
 Race Relations, over 1,400 South Africans have been banned at
 one time or another since 1950. Approximately 370 of these
 persons left the country. One prominent banned person is
 Winnie Mandela, wife of jailed ANC leader Nelson Mandela.
 Mrs. Mandela's banning order, in effect since 1977, continued
 in 1985. Its terms confined her to Brandfort, Orange Free
 State, until the Government modified the order in late
 December to provide for her to be barred only from two
 judicial districts in the Johannesburg area. Police arrested
 Mrs. Mandela twice in December for alleged violations of this
 new order. As of the end of December, she was free on bail
 pending a hearing on her arrests for these alleged
 violations. At the end of 1985, a total of 9 persons were
 officially banned, compared with 11 as of the end of December
 1984.
 Forced labor is not used in South Africa as a means of
 political coercion or education, nor as a sanction against
 political or ideological opinions. A 1984 International Labor
 Organization (ILO) report notes, however, that under the
 Prisons Act of 1959, the Commissioner of Prisons can "contract
 with any authority or public body or with a person or body of
 persons for the hiring and employment of prisoners under
 sentence." The report further noted that a large portion of
 the prisoners designated for such work are blacks who have
 been convicted of pass law offenses and that the agricultural
 sector has made the greatest use of this convict labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The power of the South African judiciary at all levels is
 circumscribed by stringent security legislation and by the
 
 
 298
 SOUTH AFRICA
 jurisprudential principle of parliamentary supremacy, which
 renders judges powerless to alter, strike down, or refuse to
 enforce properly passed acts of Parliament. All of South
 Africa's judges in both the Magistrate's and Supreme Courts
 are white. The country's only nonwhite members of the bench,
 two colored magistrates, resigned in September, stating that
 they did not want to be involved in the adjudication of
 political" cases.
 South Africa has an adversarial system of criminal justice
 drawn from a mixed heritage of Roman-Dutch and British
 jurisprudence. Trials of lesser offenses are adjudicated by
 magistrates, who are career employees of the civil service in
 the executive branch and who are widely believed to be
 progovernment in their views. More serious offenses,
 including capital crimes, are tried in the Supreme Courts.
 Determination of guilt or innocence is made by the presiding
 judge or magistrate. There are no juries. Persons charged
 with common crimes are presumed innocent until proven guilty,
 although Parliament has modified this general presumption of
 innocence for many security offenses. The Internal Security
 Act effectively places the burden of proof of innocence on an
 accused for a number of offenses enumerated in the Act. Both
 security and common crimes cases are tried in civilian courts.
 The independence of the judiciary is often questioned in South
 Africa, particularly at the magistrate level. Some judges of
 the Supreme Court, appointed to the bench from the ranks of
 the elite corps of South African Supreme Court practitioners
 ("advocates"), are believed to demonstrate considerably more
 intellectual and political independence than do magistrates.
 Defendants in all criminal cases have the right to counsel.
 If a person cannot pay for his or her defense, limited funds
 for legal assistance are available through the publicly
 supported Legal Aid Fund and through various private
 organizations. These sources, however, are insufficient to
 meet the need. The vast majority of defendants prosecuted for
 pass law violations appear in court without legal counsel.
 Courts usually appoint counsel in capital cases where the
 defendant cannot afford his or her own lawyer. Security
 trials are often held in remote locations, far from
 metropolitan areas. Because of case backlogs, postponements
 and the practice of hearing cases concurrently, criminal
 trials can often take months, even years, to complete. This
 is particularly true in security cases.
 The Government undertook two significant high treason
 prosecutions in 1985. One case involved high treason, murder,
 and other security charges against 22 South Africans
 associated with the United Democratic Front, Azanian People's
 Organization [AZAPO], and other groups, arising out of
 widespread civil unrest in the Vaal Triangle region of
 Transvaal Province in September 1984. By the end of the year,
 the trial proper had not yet begun and all defendants were in
 custody, the courts having refused bail. In another
 significant security case, 12 UDF figures and four labor union
 activists were charged with high treason in Natal. In
 December, the State, in a surprise move, dismissed all charges
 against the 12 UDF defendants but continued its prosecution of
 the four labor union leaders, who remained free on bail as the
 trial continued. The American Bar Association Trial Observer
 Program has sent monitors to these proceedings.
 
 
 299
 SOUTH AFRICA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The system of apartheid necessarily involves the Government in
 extensive regulation of social, personal, and family life.
 Membership in an ethnic group or race is based on definitions
 and decisions of the Government under the Population
 Registration Act. In borderline cases, racial classification
 is determined administratively by a racial classification
 board, empowered to weigh evidence and to issue a verdict on
 an individual's race when the parents' racial classification
 is not known. Under apartheid, association in many social
 settings is not a matter of free choice. The Separate
 Amenities Act allows public premises to be reserved for the
 exclusive use of persons of a particular race. In recent
 years, the Government has expanded the scope of administrative
 exceptions to apartheid laws, and has allowed some
 restaurants, hotels, theaters, cinemas, drive-in theaters,
 private hospitals, parks, libraries, intercity railroad
 coaches, and other public amenities to admit persons of all
 races upon application. In 1985, the Parliament repealed
 long-standing statutory bans on marriage and sexual
 relationships between whites and nonwhites, and the Government
 also announced that it would consider amendments to the Group
 Areas Act to accommodate the residential needs of mixed-race
 couples.
 Despite substantial reforms in the area of so-called "petty
 apartheid" in recent years, a substantial degree of social
 segregation still exists in South Africa, which is mandated by
 numerous statutes, provincial ordinances, and municipal
 by-laws providing for social segregation of the races in a
 wide range of public facilities, including trains, buses,
 taxis, parks, cinemas, hotels, and beaches. Social
 segregation, however, is now being enforced with less rigidity
 than has been the case in the past and is gradually becoming a
 matter of local option. State theaters are now desegregated,
 and in 1985, motion picture theater owners succeeded in
 persuading authorities to allow them to follow suit for some
 cinemas. Some local authorities have made use of the limited
 discretion they have to desegregate facilities under their
 control, while others have not. Desegregation is thus carried
 out on an ad hoc rather than on a blanket basis: for example,
 the Johannesburg City Council desegregated public parks but
 not public swimming pools. Two examples of desegregation on a
 national basis took place during 1985: effective September 1,
 the Department of Transportation desegregated intercity
 railroad coaches on a limited basis. While "whites only"
 coaches are still available for those who wish to use them,
 whites can ride in mixed race cars, if they desire. Many
 major hotels in South Africa's larger cities now have
 "international" (i.e., desegregated) status, and the trend
 here and elsewhere in the area of public accommodations
 appears to be toward greater desegregation.
 Freedom to choose one's own associates is also limited by the
 Group Areas Act, which holds that the different races must
 reside in separate areas. In the case of blacks, even the
 right to reside in a segregated urban "township" is not
 available unless one has employment and government permission
 to reside in such an area. Most nonwhites who live in urban
 township houses rent them from the Government, which owns and
 subsidizes them. Since 1983, however, blacks have been able
 to obtain renewable 99-year leases on land in many urban
 
 
 300
 SOUTH AFRICA
 townships for home construction. In 1985, the Government
 announced that it would introduce a freehold system of land
 ownership for nonwhites. Many urban townships and portions
 thereof are still lacking in some or all modern amenities,
 such as electricity, running water, indoor plumbing, paved
 roads, and recreational facilities. Townships are often
 located at inconvenient commuting distances from cities, where
 most employment opportunities for South Africa's nonwhites are
 found. Perhaps most importantly, the townships, even where
 equipped with acceptable amenities and where occupied by
 prosperous elements of the nonwhite community, exact an
 immeasurable cost in human dignity from their residents
 because they are legally segregated communities.
 The Government has forcibly relocated many people because the
 blueprint of group areas, dictated by the apartheid system,
 did not always correspond to the actual location of the
 various racial groups. Since 1961, the forced resettlement of
 an estimated 3.5 million nonwhites has taken place, according
 to figures of the South African Council of Churches.
 Government figures issued in 1984 confirmed that 2 million
 blacks had been resettled since 1960. In early 1985, the
 Government announced a suspension of forced removals pending a
 review of its resettlement policy and stated that relocations
 in the future would only come after negotiations with
 residents concerning the terms of removal. In several
 instances, however, the Government has refused to negotiate
 with recognized black community leaders and has negotiated
 with representatives chosen by the Government. Resettlement
 areas, particularly when located in the homelands, usually
 have inadequate infrastructure and insufficient land and water
 for profitable agriculture. The Government has also forced
 some white farmers to sell their land and relocate to allow
 for creation of the homelands.
 The Black Urban Areas Consolidation Act allows police to enter
 homes without a warrant if any black is suspected of residing
 or working in the area illegally. The Criminal Procedures Act
 of 1977 authorizes a judge or magistrate to issue a search
 warrant if there is some reason to believe-that "the internal
 security of the republic or the maintenance of law and order
 is likely to be endangered by or in consequence of a 'meeting'
 being held in a given place." Under this same Act, a police
 officer may enter, search, and question without a warrant if
 the officer has reason tobelieve a-warrant would be issued
 but the delay caused by first obtaining the warrant would
 defeat the purpose of the search.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of the press deteriorated in 1985 even though South
 Africa's largely white-owned press continued, when possible,
 to engage in vigorous criticism of the Government and its
 policies. Press freedom, however, is seriously circumscribed
 by several acts of Parliament, including the Publications Act,
 the Defense Act, the Police Act, the Prisons Act, the Internal
 Security Act, and the Protection of Information Act. These
 laws severely restrict reporting on the operation of various
 departments of government and the publication of views that
 are radically critical of the status quo. While there were no
 known convictions of journalists under these Acts in 1985, the
 Government used these laws throughout the year--pursuing, then
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 SOUTH AFRICA
 dropping charges in some cases--in such a way as to ensure a
 degree of self-censorship. South Africa's press is sensitive
 to the aforementioned laws because they render thousands of
 persons potentially liable to criminal prosecution. Among
 proscribed areas of reporting are "official secrets" and
 energy supplies, including petroleum and nuclear energy. An
 example of the Government's use of these Acts occurred in
 November, when the Government brought charges under the
 Internal Security Act against Cape Times Editor Anthony Heard,
 after his newspaper published his interview with ANC Leader
 Oliver Tambo. In 1985, following the state of emergency
 declaration in July, the Government also moved to reduce
 international as well as national coverage of political unrest
 in the nation's black and colored townships. On numerous
 occasions, it barred both foreign and local reporters from
 areas of unrest or detained them for brief periods for alleged
 refusal to obey a police order to leave an area. Among the
 numerous foreign and domestic journalists so arrested were two
 American correspondents for the Dallas Morning News, and a
 Kenya-based British journalist for Newsweek magazine who had
 written an article particularly critical of police conduct in
 handling unrest in South Africa. The Government also banned
 the Newsweek issue in question under the Publications Act.
 South African visas for foreign journalists are often unduly
 delayed when subjected to lengthy processing procedures.
 In September, the Government established an information bureau
 under the leadership of a Deputy Minister. While the stated
 purpose of establishing the bureau was to facilitate visits by
 foreign media representatives, some observers saw the
 establishment of the bureau as a signal that the Government
 planned a clampdown on foreign media in South Africa. In
 November, amid claims by security police that some members of
 the press had instigated violent acts to obtain sensational
 photo coverage and that the presence of TV cameras attracted
 and incited rioters in areas of unrest, the Government banned
 TV coverage, photography, sketching, and radio recording from
 areas under state of emergency regulations. Heavy penalties
 for infractions include fines of up to $7,200 and/or
 imprisonment for up to 10 years. As a result, media coverage
 of ongoing black unrest in South Africa, especially through
 television, has been greatly reduced.
 In addition to official censorship and self-censorship, an
 institutionalized voluntary system of self-regulation of the
 press exists. The Media Council, formed voluntarily in 1983,
 has upheld the principle of self-regulation by newspapers. In
 1985, the Media Council conducted lengthy proceedings
 involving a claim brought by the security police against the
 Johannesburg Star. The issue presented was whether two Star
 reporters had correctly quoted Ywo security police officers as
 having been involved in a clandestine campaign to discredit
 Rev. Allan Boesak, a vigorous critic of the South African
 Government. The Council found in favor of the two newsmen.
 The government-appointed board established under the
 Publications Act may prohibit the distribution or possession
 of publications, films, or other materials that in its view
 are "obscene" or "blasphemous"; that bring any section of the
 public into ridicule; that harm relations between sections of
 the public; or that are prejudicial to the safety of the
 State. Decisions of the Publications Committee may be
 appealed to the government-appointed Publications Appeal
 Board, but not to the courts.
 
 
 302
 SOUTH AFRICA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Internal Security Act seriously obstructs freedom of
 assembly as it gives magistrates the power to prohibit or
 impose conditions on the holding of meetings and to close off
 areas to the public to prevent prohibited gatherings. In
 response to widespread unrest in 1976, the Minister of Justice
 banned all outdoor gatherings except sports or specially
 authorized meetings. The Government has renewed this ban on
 an annual basis since 1976 and did so again in 1985. Police
 frequently arrested persons in townships on charges of
 participating in illegal gatherings.
 In addition, the Government has banned other sorts of
 gatherings, such as indoor meetings of a variety of
 organizations, and funerals in areas of unrest. In June
 alone, public meetings of 29 organizations, many affiliated
 with the UDF, were banned. Also in 1985, the Government
 banned the Congress of South African Students (COSAS), the
 country's most extensive and influential organization of black
 students.
 During 1985, some human rights groups charged that government
 policy, both before and subsequent to the state of emergency
 declaration on July 20, was to arrest and detain key
 leadership elements in the opposition UDF. UDF leadership in
 Natal, Cape, and Transvaal provinces was largely decimated by
 detentions in 1985. Founded in 1983, the UDF is a loosely
 organized national movement of several hundred community
 groups, church and civic organizations and labor unions.
 Although the movement contains elements that adhere to the
 more revolutionary values of the African National Congress,
 most of its member organizations describe themselves as
 advocates of nonviolent change. There have also been a number
 of instances of police harassment of legally held meetings.
 The South African Labor Relations Act recognizes the right of
 employees to form and to join trade uni6ns. Amendments to the
 Labor Relations Act passed between 1979 and 1981 granted South
 African blacks full status as employees foL. the first time and
 removed impediments to the legal operation of black trade
 unions. Trade union members, approximately 50 percent of whom
 are black, constitute 13-15 percent of the total labor force
 of about 12 million. In 1979, less than 100,000 blacks were
 trade union members. In 1985, black trade union membership
 stood at nearly 800,000, according to government estimates.
 In December, 34 black trade unions with an estimated
 membership of more than 400,000 combined to form a national
 labor federation, the Congress of South African Trade Unions
 (COSATU).
 Notwithstanding recent reforms in South African labor law,
 significant race discrimination still exists in the mining
 industry, where a long-entrenched "job reservation" policy
 continues to ban blacks and Asians from high paying skilled
 positions such as blaster, mine manager, and mine overseer.
 The Labor Relations Act does not cover farm workers and
 domestic servants, who together comprise approximately 2
 million workers (about one-sixth of the total labor force).
 Workers in these two categories, nearly all of whom are black,
 enjoy few protections under the law.
 With the qualified exception of KwaZulu, none of the homelands
 has labor legislation to match the post-1979 reforms passed by
 
 
 303
 SOUTH AFRICA
 the South African Parliament. Ciskei has banned a major trade
 union active in the Eastern Cape (the South African Allied
 Workers Union), and Bophuthatswana has prohibited unions
 headquartered elsewhere from operating in its territory.
 The right to strike exists under the Labor Relations Act but
 is qualified by a mandatory prestrike arbitration process that
 can take as long as 2 months to complete. Nearly all strikes
 occurring in recent years have been staged by emerging black
 unions, and most of them have been technically illegal. In
 addition, the right to strike is seriously modified by the
 common law right of an employer to fire any striker (whether
 the strike is legal or illegal) on grounds of breach of the
 individual's employment contract. In September 1985, a large
 mining company fired nearly 1,000 legal strikers after they
 failed to report to work for 2 consecutive days. The
 strikers' union, the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM),
 appealed these dismissals to the Industrial Court, which ruled
 in November that management had committed an unfair labor
 practice in dismissing the workers. A general prohibition
 against outdoor meetings for other than sports or cultural
 purposes has impeded both strike activity and union organizing
 efforts.
 Organized labor's effectiveness in representing workers has
 grown substantially since 1979. This growth has been evident
 in a number of ways, among them the following: unionization of
 key economic sectors (especially mining, metals, and
 transportation); a steady increase in the number of
 recognition agreements; black union participation in
 industrial councils; and increased recourse to the Industrial
 Court and Conciliation Boards. In addition, the increase in
 the number of strikes, which reached record levels in 1984 and
 1985, reflects the success of black trade unions in mobilizing
 workers and in articulating grievances.
 South African trade unions are independent of the Government,
 and most of them have no links, official or unofficial, to any
 political party or movement. Some exceptions are: the
 all-white South African Confederation of Labor, with about
 100,000 members, which is widely believed to have ties to the
 right-wing Herstigte Nasionale party; a collection of about 11
 black trade unions, with a total membership of close to
 100,000, which are affiliated with the UDF; and 9 other black
 unions, with a claimed total membership of 75,000, which are
 officially affiliated with AZAPO.
 South Africa has not been a member of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) since the early 1960's. The Government
 monitors but does not prohibit trade union relations with the
 international labor movement. Government passport and visa
 policy, however, sometimes impedes these relations. The
 75,000-member Council of Unions of South Africa (CUSA) is the
 only South African labor organization that is a full-scale
 affiliate of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU). The Federation of South African Trade Unions
 (FOSATU), which was incorporated into the new federation
 COSATU, had observer status in the ICFTU.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 South Africa's multiracial society has a wide variety of
 religious denominations, and the Government generally respects
 freedom of worship. Religious organizations are allowed to
 
 
 304
 SOUTH AFRICA
 hold meetings and other activities without interference as
 long as they do not seriously challenge government policies.
 As with other aspects of South African life, churches are
 often divided along racial lines, but many churches (including
 a growing number of white churches) challenge apartheid on
 moral grounds. The Defense Act provides alternative service
 options for religious objectors to national-military service.
 Conscientious objectors-on nonreligious grounds continue to be
 subject to a maximum.6-year sentence for refusing to serve.
 The Government is often at odds with .some of the country's
 leading churchmen. -who are outspoken and vigorous critics of
 the apartheid system. These include Anglican Bishop of
 Johannesburg Desmond Tutu, Rev. Allan Boesak, and Archbishop
 Dennis Hurley, head.of the Catholic Archdiocese of Durban.
 Rev. Boesak wasdetained under the Internal Security Act from
 August 27 to September 20. The bail order defining the terms
 of his freedom;.pend-ing the outcome of charges against him
 under the Internal Security Act, specifically permitted him to
 address bona fide religious gatherings, while seriously
 hampering his movements and contacts. In November, a court
 .lifted an earlier requirement that Rev. Boesak surrender his
 passport, but the Government nevertheless suspended his
 passport. In February, Archbishop Denis Hurley was acquitted
 of charges under the Police Act. The Government had charged
 that he had made false statements concerning atrocities
 allegedly committed by the Namibian special police unit,
 Koevoet, but-opened.the trial against him with an admission
 that the-Archbishop had not committed any violations of the
 Police Act.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Black residence and travel are regulated by "influx control"
 or "pass" laws that severely restrict the right of blacks to
 remain in a given urban area for more than 72 hours at a
 time. Periodically, police conduct raids or sweeps of
 restricted areas during which all passes are checked. Persons
 illegally residing in the area are arrested. Upon conviction
 of a pass law offense, a person is subject to being
 transported to his or her assigned homeland. In 1983, in the
 landmark "Rikhoto" case, the Supreme Court held that black
 migrants who have worked 10 years or more for the same
 employer, or 15 years for successive employers, are entitled
 to permanent residence in the area of employment. The
 decision was not self-executing, and blacks must undergo a
 lengthy administrative-process to document their claim to
 .these rights. Conditions for obtaining these rights were
 eased in 1985. The Government has linked the granting of such
 rights to the availability of housing, and many people
 eligible for permanent urban residence are prevented from
 living in urban areas due to housing shortages. Arrests for
 pass law violations decreased markedly in the latter part of
 the year.
 In 1985, a study by the President's Council recommended the
 abolition of influx control, a long-standing and central
 pillar of apartheid policy. State President P.W. Botha
 subsequently pledged that the influx control laws would be
 replaced by a program of "orderly urbanization," the content
 of which is not yet known. The pass laws are a major irritant
 in the daily lives of blacks.
 
 
 305
 SOUTH AFRICA
 The Government announced that it would support repeal of an
 existing "whites only" provision in the immigration law during
 the 1986 parliamentary session in favor of a provision
 allowing nonwhites to immigrate to South Africa if they can be
 assimilated into an existing racial group.
 In 1985, the Government also announced it would drop a legal
 requirement for whites to obtain permits to visit nonwhite
 areas (in practice, the Government had seldom enforced this
 restriction on travel). As part of state of emergency
 regulations, however, police often restricted entry into
 townships in emergency-affected areas.
 Whites must possess valid travel documents in order to travel
 abroad and to emigrate legally. With the exception of banned
 persons, these documents are not difficult for whites to
 obtain.
 The South African Supreme Court has declared that a citizen's
 access to a South African passport is a privilege and not a
 right. Under a 1982 court ruling, the Minister of Home
 Affairs has an unchallenged right to revoke a passport without
 giving any reasons for his action. In October 1985, State
 President P.W. Botha ordered the refusal of passports to a
 group of eight white students of the University of
 Stellenbosch who wished to travel to Zambia to hold talks with
 members of the African National Congress. A group of Dutch
 Reformed Church ministers was refused passports for similar
 purposes. In November, Rev. Allan Boesak cancelled plans to
 travel to the U.S. when the Government held his passport. The
 South African Government frequently refuses passports to black
 trade union figures wishing to travel abroad, including to the
 United States. The incidence of passport refusals to trade
 union officials appeared to increase after the declaration of
 the state of emergency.
 The Government generally requires that any individual assigned
 to an "independent" homeland must travel on a homeland travel
 document when traveling abroad. Legal restrictions exist for
 Asians who wish to reside in or visit the Orange Free State
 and certain parts of Natal province. A ruling National Party
 congress in the Orange Free State voted in 1985 to begin the
 process of lifting these restrictions on Asian residence.
 Although the South African Government is not a signatory to
 international conventions on refugees, it provides informal
 sanctuary to as many as 40,000 refugees from Mozambique.
 Relief assistance is provided to these refugees by South
 African private and voluntary organizations, and the
 Government permits access by international observers to areas
 where refugees are found.
 There are approximately 22,000 South Africans who have been
 granted refugee status in other African countries. Despite a
 significant increase in domestic violence during 1985, there
 has been no marked emigration of black South Africans at the
 level observed in 1976. While there are no generally accepted
 statistics on the outflow of white South Africans, reports
 indicate that a substantial increase in emigration occurred,
 in part at least as a reaction to domestic violence, in 1985.
 
 
 306
 SOUTH AFRICA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Until 1984, South Africa's national political institutions were
 reserved for whites only. Under the new Constitution that came
 into effect in September 1984, the right of political
 participation at the national level has been extended, albeit on
 a limited basis, to South Africa's colored and Asian citizens.
 The Government continues to deny national political rights to
 South Africa's black majority, who comprise 72 percent of the
 population.- Under the new Constitution, all officially
 registered political parties operate as freely as the ruling
 National Party. The new Constitution created a tricameral
 parliament with separate chambers for whites, coloreds, and
 Asians. Members for each house are elected by separate,
 racially based consituencies. Each house has primary
 responsibility for legislation affecting its own racial
 constituency. A strong chief executive, the State President,
 decides which issues of general concern are to be treated by all
 three.chambers. If efforts at consensus on general affairs
 matters fail, they are referred to the President's Council, a
 body composed of whites, coloreds, and Indians, for an advisory
 opinion. The lines between "own affairs" and general affairs
 are not always very precise. Matters that appear to be
 exclusively general affairs include foreign policy, defense,
 national security, and black affairs. Education is normally
 dealt with as an "own affair" but is subject to general laws
 prescribing norms and standards for salaries, curriculum, and
 examinations. The terms of the new Constitution and the
 existence of a white majority in Parliament work to ensure
 control by the white House of Assembly over key general
 affairs. While there is a vigorous, outspoken opposition in the
 House of Assembly, the ruling National Party, which has
 dominated South African political affairs since its first
 parliamentary victory in 1948, dominates legislative affairs by
 sheer force of numbers. Within the National Party, viewpoints
 range from "verligte" (enlightened) to "verkrampte"
 (reactionary), with internal differences resolved in party
 caucuses.
 Lacking a role in the national Parliament, political
 participation for blacks remains limited to a franchise in one
 of the 10 homelands, to which all blacks are assigned through
 ethnic or linguistic identification. Such assignments take
 place irrespective of the wishes of those assigned and without
 regard to the fact that they may not have been born, nor ever
 lived in, nor even visited their putative homeland. When a
 homeland "requests" and is then granted "independence" by the
 South African Government, blacks assigned to that homeland lose
 their South African citizenship and receive the "citizenship" of
 the homeland. Approximately 8 million blacks have been
 denationalized under this policy by South African legislation
 granting "independence" to four homelands: Transkei (1976);
 Bophuthatswana (1977); Venda (1979); and Ciskei (1981). The
 South African Government stated in 1985 that it had no intention
 of abolishing the homelands system. It did indicate, however,
 that it would propose legislation in the 1986 parliamentary
 session that would extend an offer of South African citizenship
 to all of the country's blacks, including "citizens" of the
 so-called "independent" homelands, who would presumably have
 dual citizenship. The exact terms of this potential citizenship
 arrangement remain to be defined in new legislation.
 
 
 307
 SOUTH AFRICA
 Nearly 10 million blacks live in townships near white urban
 areas. The only voting rights blacks are able to exercise are
 those granted under the Community Councils Act of 1977 and the
 Black Local Authorities Act of 1982. The Black Local
 Authorities Act of 1982 elevated the status of black municipal
 authorities to that enjoyed by white municipal governments. It
 did nothing, however, about the critical problems of inadequate
 financial resources and the lack of political credibility faced
 by black local government. Much of the violence that took place
 in black townships in 1985 was directed at black town councils
 and councillors, underscoring the weakness of these local
 authorities. In 1985, Parliament passed legislation to replace
 all-white provincial councils with multiracial regional services
 councils, to include representatives of black, Asian, and
 colored local governments. It is expected that the first of
 these multiracial bodies will be formed during 1986.
 No women presently serve as ministers in the Government. Two
 women serve as members of the State President's Council. Three
 of the 178 seats in the Parliament's white House of Assembly are
 held by women. The colored House of Representatives has two
 women members, and the Indian House of Delegates one. In 1985,
 9 women served alongside 167 men in provincial councils.
 Generally speaking, women have achieved more success in
 electoral politics at the local than at the national level.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The South African Government extends little or no cooperation to
 various United Nations bodies or private organizations
 attempting to investigate the Government's human rights record.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is permitted
 access to convicted security prisoners but may visit them only
 annually.   The ICRC does not visit security prisoners sentenced
 to death because the South African Government refuses to permit
 the ICRC to speak to the prisoners in private. Access to most,
 but not all, security detainees is denied. In 1985, the
 Government granted access to several Western interviewers,
 including British citizens and Americans, to jailed ANC leader
 Nelson Mandela. The Government permitted an American Bar
 Association representative entry into the country to observe
 proceedings in two significant treason trials that were pending
 in Natal and in Transvaal provinces. The Government refused
 numerous other requests to interview Mandela, including requests
 from some members of the U.S. Congress.
 A number of South African organizations observe, report, and
 contest human rights violations in the country. In addition to
 black political organizations, the Lawyers for Human Rights, the
 Black Sash, the Legal Resources Center, the South African
 Council of Churches and the Detainees' Parents' Support
 Committee are active on a wide range of human rights issues and
 assist persons who have been incarcerated under security laws.
 The South African Institute of Race Relations' (SAIRR) annual
 report is a primary source on human rights questions in South
 Africa. Amnesty International, in its 1985 report (covering
 1984), expressed concern about the imprisonment or restriction
 of prisoners of conscience. It was also concerned about the
 detention without trial of suspected opponents of the Government
 and of local administrations in the South African "homelands."
 Freedom House rates South Africa "partly free."
 
 
 308
 SOUTH AFRICA
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 According to the World Bank, the South African population was
 32.5 million in 1985 (whites 16 percent, blacks 72 percent,
 coloreds 9 percent, Asians 3 percent), with an overall growth
 rate of 2.4 percent. The most recent census of the country's
 population, taken in 1980, records average annual population
 growth rates by racial group from 1970 to 1980 as: whites, 1.7
 percent; coloreds, 2.2 percent; Asians, 2.4 percent; and blacks,
 2.7 percent. More than half of South Africa's blacks reside in
 the country's 10 homelands, which are for the most part
 resource-poor and lacking in job opportunities. Per capita
 gross national product was $2,490 in 1983. Income distribution
 has traditionally been skewed along racial lines.
 The South African economy is dualistic in nature, containing
 both a highly sophisticated modern sector and a large,
 underdeveloped rural sector, where the vast majority of people
 is engaged in subsistence agriculture. Virtually the entire
 white and Asian populations receive their income from the
 country's "first world" economy. The black population also
 participates in the "first world" economy, generally at
 significantly lower rates of skill/authority and remuneration
 levels than whites. Job reservation has been lifted, however,
 apart from some job categories in the mines. The modern economy
 has been hard hit by 4 years of recession and this downturn has
 exacerbated black unrest.
 Subsistence agriculture, supplemented by remittances from
 relatives working in "white" South Africa, is.the most prevalent
 source of livelihood in the homelands. Since many, if not most,
 of the economically active males from the homelands seek
 employment in the modern sector of "white" South Africa, a
 disproportionate number of dependents (women, children, and the
 elderly) reside in the homelands. Though agricultural progress
 is.being achieved in some rural black areas, the homelands as a
 whole do not produce enough food to feed their resident
 populations.
 Black unemployment is not measured directly. Government figures
 show an increase in unemployment among the economically active
 population throughout 1985. These figures do not reflect
 conditions of unemployment and underemployment in the rural
 areas. The official unemployment rate among blacks was recorded
 at 7.8 percent in June 1985. Private estimates of total black
 unemployment (including the 10 homelands) range up to 25
 percent. In some townships, unemployment is thought to be
 dramatically higher.
 Official World Bank statistics indicate an overall infant
 mortality rate of 85.6 per 1,000 live births in 1985. Official
 government statistics on infant mortality by racial group in
 1978 were: whites, 14.9; coloreds, 80.6; and Asians, 25.3.
 Records for blacks are incomplete, but estimates of infant
 mortality among this sector of the population range up to more
 than 200 per 1,000 live births, especially in rural homelands
 such as Ciskei. The much higher rate of infant mortality among
 blacks is ascribed largely to poor nutrition, exacerbated by
 drought, to poor sanitary conditions, and to a lack of
 sufficient hospitals and doctors for blacks, especially in the
 homelands. A respected university study done in 1981--before
 the drought became serious--found 2.9 million children (mostly
 black) suffering from at least mild forms of malnutrition.
 These factors also account for the difference in life expectancy
 
 
 309
 SOUTH AFRICA
 among the different population groups. World Bank statistics
 for 1985 show a life expectancy of 62.5 years for all South
 Africans. A 1983 South African Government report indicates
 whites have a life expectancy of 70.3 years, Asians, 55 years,
 coloreds, 59 years, and blacks, 57.5 years.
 The effects of the drought continued, despite improved rainfall
 at the end of the year. Farmers remain uncertain whether the
 rainfall will be sufficient to ensure a return to normal
 harvests. The South African Government has provided drought
 relief of $20 million to the homelands and is currently spending
 $13 million for job creation and training to combat the effects
 of the recession and the drought. Many government critics
 believe these amounts fall far short of what is necessary and
 have called upon the Government to provide money for emergency
 feeding schemes.
 The most recent World Bank data available indicate that as of
 1960, 57 percent of the adult population of South Africa was
 literate. As school attendance for whites, coloreds, and Asians
 has traditionally been compulsory, it is likely that most adult
 members of these groups are literate. The Government began to
 implement a system of free compulsory education up to the fourth
 grade for blacks in 1981. This system is now in effect at 250
 schools, with a total of 100,000 students affected. Some
 surveys have claimed that 50-60 percent of all adult blacks are
 literate. Such findings are difficult to corroborate, given the
 rural location of so much of the black population and
 disagreement over standards used to gauge literacy. In 1981,
 black pupil enrollment was just over 5 million in regular
 primary through high school grades. Only slightly more than 1
 percent of enrollment was in the last grade of high school,
 illustrative of the high drop-out rate. Having announced the
 .goal of equal education for all population groups, the
 Government has increased the total education budget so that it
 exceeds that for defense. While the Government has increased
 outlays for black education from $35 million in 1972 to $354
 million (not constant dollars), there remains a high disparity
 between spending on education, with outlays for white students
 far exceeding those for blacks. The South African Institute of
 Race Relations estimates per capita spending on education as
 $661 for whites, $435 for Asians, $227 for coloreds, and $94 for
 blacks. Black enrollment at "white" universities has been
 growing slowly. SAIRR figures indicate that in 1983, 14 percent
 of the students at South Africa's 4 English-speaking
 universities were nonwhite, while there was a sprinkling of
 nonwhite students at the country's 5 Afrikaans universities.
 Political unrest that swept many of the country's black and
 colored townships in 1985 took the form of school boycotts in
 many areas, including Soweto, the nation's largest black
 township. This has compounded the problem caused by an already
 poor educational system for blacks.
 South Africa suffers from a housing shortage that continues to
 worsen, with the black population being the hardest hit. Early
 in 1985, the Minister of Cooperation and Development announced
 that the black housing shortage had reached 364,270 or an
 estimated 196,000 houses outside the homelands. Despite this
 enormous need, the housing situation is worsening. A 1-year
 program to sell 500,000 government-owned houses (most of which
 are occupied by blacks) at discounts of up to 40 percent, begun
 in July 1983, was extended beyond its original 1 year timeframe
 and continued through July 1985. During the first 14 months of
 
 
 310
 SOUTH AFRICA
 the program, however, only 32,000 homes were sold. The granting
 to urban blacks of 99-year leasehold rights, which are renewable
 and inheritable, has not been widely utilized because of
 inadequate access to finance and because the sites offered were
 often distant and inconvenient. The Government has announced
 the intent to enact freehold land tenure for blacks; its entire
 urbanization policy is reportedly under review.
 The Labor Relations Act of 1956 provides a mechanism for
 negotiation between labor and management of industry-by-
 industry minimum wage standards. At present, some 101
 industries come under the provisions of the Act. There is no
 universal minimum wage in South Africa. The Occupational and
 Safety Act prohibits the employment of minors under the age of
 16 in certain industries. The Act on Basic Conditions of
 Employment sets forth certain minimum standards for employment,
 including provisions for a standard work week of 46 hours in
 most industries, as well as mandatory provisions for vacation
 and sick time. The Machinery and Occupational Safety Act
 mandates minimum standards for the design and use of certain
 types of industrial machinery.
 Women of all races in South Africa suffer varying degrees of
 legal, cultural, and economic discrimination, most of which is
 based on tradition rather than codified in law. In 1984, South
 African statistics showed that women constituted 41.1 percent of
 the work force, but held only 12 percent of managerial
 positions. Women traditionally earn lower wages than men and
 are, generally speaking, underrepresented in the country's
 political and business establishment. At school, they are often
 encouraged to take traditional "women's courses" in such areas
 of study as nursing, education, and the humanities. As noted in
 Section 3, women are, for the most part, not prominent in
 government. Like their male counterparts, black women suffer
 from extensive legal handicaps and acts of discrimination that
 stem from South Africa's system of apartheid. Black women also
 suffer from other legal disabilities based on sex. They are
 regarded by South African law as perpetual minors. There is
 some movement, however, to extend provisions of the Matrimonial
 Property Act of 1984 (which abolished the marital power of the
 husband and substantially increased the property rights of
 white, colored, and Asian women) to black women. Maternity
 benefits are not guaranteed under South African law, and a
 pregnant woman can be legally dismissed from her job. Against a
 backdrop of traditional sex and race discrimination, a nascent
 women's rights movement has taken hold in South Africa. Women's
 organizations, often multiracial, have been at the forefront of
 the struggle against both race and sex discrimination.
 
 
 311
